# Abstract

This paper showcases how reality deviates from economic theory and whether media coverage drives these deviations when analyzing immigration's impact on labor force participation. Understanding the relationship between immigration, media coverage, and fluctuations in native-born labor force participation is key to decreasing negative implications. These findings grow more important as rhetoric becomes more polarized and changes in labor force participation grow more alarming.

The paper's objective is to analyze combinations of various immigration types (ex. high-skill substitutions) and media publications during the same period. An index is created from the results to better understand how the variables are correlated.

The findings of the paper support the hypothesis that deviations from economic theory will align with moments where related media coverage was predominantly negative. This paper was produced to contribute to more nuanced discussions regarding immigration.

The methodology used is a combination of statistical models and case studies. This paper builds on the work of Ríos‐Avila's insights regarding immigration and native-born unemployment and discouragement (Ríos‐Avila, 2016). Additionally, the paper shall expand on trends surrounding native internal migration (Borjas, 2021) (Card, 2001). Finally, the paper's findings use Scheve's work regarding deviations between real-world results and theory as a foundation (Scheve, 2001). 

# Introduction

Within recent years immigration policy has been a contentious topic. One common thread exists throughout all discussions: how do immigrants impact native-born individuals? Thanks to extensive media coverage, many narratives have been spotlighted regarding this core question.

This paper will focus on the impact immigration has on labor force participation, and compare real-world findings to those predicted based on economic theory. Furthermore, media coverage surrounding immigration policy will be observed to note if any changes in labor participation, or deviation from economic theory, can be directly correlated to media coverage. AI-powered systems will be leveraged to analyze core phrases regarding this topic within the media. Instead of simply looking at reputable news sources, X will be a core source for data collection due to it being a core destination where people access the news. Within the interpretation of findings, a weight variable will be created to show what the narrative promoted most by main outlets. With this data collection strategy, misinformation and core publications will be represented with core publications having a heavier weight. This is a necessary feature for core publications tend to have the most public trust and there is a higher likelihood of programs and policies being influenced by these reports.

The core goal of the paper is to clearly display the economic impacts media has on labor force participation. The methodology to track this impact will be through establishing economic theory predictions as a baseline. From this baseline, real-world findings will be mapped on the same axes to show the magnitude of deviation. Periods with deviation, especially those with higher than average deviation, will be noted and the media coverage will be compared to note its potential influence. By recognizing the correlation between these two variables, a conclusion can be made regarding the potential relationship between media and labor force participation. 

Current literature will be referenced to offer context and a backdrop for the paper's findings within the academic world. The core difference between the predicted findings of this paper and the current literature is that this paper aims to understand the potential drivers of change in labor force participation when immigration takes place.

To ensure nuances of immigration policy are represented, the four immigration types will be analyzed: immigrants are high-skilled complements, immigrants are low-skilled complements, immigrants are high-skilled substitutes, and immigrants are low-skilled substitutes. An example of a high-skill substitute may be immigrants who are brought to work within innovative sectors like the technology sector. In direct contrast, an example of a low-skilled substitute maybe someone working a job in construction. Most media coverage tends to highlight cases where immigrants are viewed as perfect substitutes, but this paper aims to shed some light on how often that is the case and how various immigration types will yield different economic outcomes. 

Based on potential discouragement, it is predicted that most deviations from economic theory will coincide with a negative media perception. These findings are published with the hope that more productive conversations surrounding immigration can be structured. The paper aims to achieve this by highlighting how oversimplification within the media hurts labor force participation. Additionally, it hopes to highlight how more positive or diverse perspectives can lead to a more productive workforce as individuals feel less discouraged by changes within the labor market. 

Drawing on existing literature, the expands on Ríos‐Avila's analysis surrounding immigration’s impact on native-born unemployment and discouragement(Ríos‐Avila, 2016). Ríos‐Avila utilized the basic monthly Current Population Survey from 2001 and 2013 and identified workers who transitioned out of unemployment. Our paper notes what the dominant public perception at the time was regarding immigration and how this correlates with the unemployment or discouragement rates of workers.

The paper will also build on the trends highlighted by Borjas and Card which surround native internal migration (Borjas, 2021) (Card, 2001). Through a comparison of core immigration influxes and media coverage, our findings showcase how correlated these migrations are with the narratives promoted in the media. It should be noted that the paper utilizes Scheve's work as a foundational piece as it establishes core differences between theory and literature regarding labor-market competition and immigration policy (Scheve, 2001). Another fundamental piece of literature for this study is Card's research surrounding the effects of the Mariel Boatlift (Card, 1990). Both pieces help ground the findings of this paper in a medium that allows for further applications outside of the literary realm. 

The Mariel Boatlift will act as a core case study for both the direct impacts of immigration on the Miami labor market can be tracked, and the media coverage surrounding this event can be analyzed to gauge its influence on the findings. The paper will take into consideration how the randomness of the sample may impact the scalability of the findings and aims to use this case as a potential benchmark for analyzing the correlation between immigration in the labor market and the media.

Inspired by Dustmann, a model will be introduced to display the labor market impact of immigration but furthermore how the media coverage may have acted as a driver for the changes witnessed(Dustmann, 2008). 

The core hypothesis of the paper is that deviations from economic theory will align with moments where media coverage surrounding immigration was predominantly negative. These deviations will also be reflected in labor force participation in a similar fashion. Specific cases that may offer the clearest correlation are cases where the media highlights an influx of workers who are high- or low-skilled substitutes. In this case, a decrease in labor force participation due to discouragement is predicted. This prediction is made under the current notion that media can heavily influence public sentiment. This hypothesis extends this notion to highlight that media will transitively also have the ability to influence labor market dynamics. 

This paper hopes to contribute to more nuanced discussions on immigration by highlighting the diversity among immigrant types, their economic impacts, and the impact of media coverage. In summary, by highlighting the diversity among immigrant types, their economic impacts, and the influence of media coverage this paper aims to understand the drivers behind deviations from labor economic models regarding immigration.
